life is so hard for those who practice
yoga they've got to breathe breathe
breathe and breathe all the time welcome
ladies and gents to a very special
International yoga Day episode of The
Men's Health and Women's Health show as
Indians we're all so proud of an art
form that originated in India that's now
the toast of the world today's episode
will stretch your mind body and
Imagination get ready for the pride of
your life
on the show today lessons from prime
minister modi's yoga Guru a conversation
with sadguru jagi
vasudev and aial yoga how to hang out
and hang
free first up is a conversation with the
man who discovered invented patented the
finest art of living Shri Shri Rish
Shankar joins us and gives us body
Rhythm advice to get us into the groove
what yoga does is You Know It uh it
improves your circulation in the body it
it affects your endocrine system
muscular neuromuscular
system so uh it has a multiple
benefits so healthwise yes it's very
obvious people have overcome
hypertension blood this one uh blood
sugar level becomes normal to people
heart problems heart conditions get
better cholesterol level drops so
multiple health benefits are there from
yoga now apart from
this their behavior pattern changes the
person's Behavior with their colleagues
and people in the family are all that
becomes better sharpness in intellect is
another uh byproduct of yoga I would say
sharpness of intellect and Prejudice
free
intellect and
then you know
sense of Happiness sense of Peace these
all these things just uh
develop when you attend to all these
aspects of yoga pranayama as pranayama
meditation is very important I would
emphasize on
meditation you see when I started 35
years
ago y yoga was not that popular in the
world I mean yoga people had
misconception the mainstream people
thought it's not for them especially in
the west also in the in urban cities in
this country as well they thought you
had to do yoga means you had to stand on
one leg or walk on nails or put bus all
over the body or put jetas this sort of
misconception were floating around
around the world so I I presented it as
Art of Living you know something that
that would enrich your life then people
started taking it and they started
realizing it and all the misconceptions
about yoga disappeared and people
started doing pranayama pray all the
everything many times people think
meditation is concentration Focus or
mind goes all over over the place I say
no no meditation is not
concentration it is deep conscious
relaxation up next is prime minister
Narendra modi's yoga Guru himself Dr HR
nagendra what Arenas can APM do Which
Way can he Bend Which Way can he not
curiosity today is surely going to kill
the
cat is a way of life I call SS of
holistic living and one practice if I
say in yoga is keep smiling all the time
am miss all activities will be running
walking doing everything but keeping
that smile on the face that is the real
yoga for
me suas is such a comfortable thing that
everybody can
do key Essence is relax the whole body
then slow down the breath
calm down the mind go to that infinite
silence these are the stages through
which the ASA should be
developed my favorite as is
shasan because shasan gives you
wonderful rest and relaxes all parts of
the body in a very natural way and very
easy everybody would love to do that
shasan and we tell hypertensives you do
shasan 3 to five times in a day your
blood pressure is going to come down to
normaly unfortunately we have lost that
touch to
relax so you must relax you know many of
the yoga studios and others we teach
different ASAS for no swimming down and
others no shabas no relaxation the key
essence of ASAS is relaxation
now we have developed the technique
called
aanan in which a sequence of asanas come
to give very deep press to the whole
body mind system starting with shasan
lying down 1 minute shasan called IR
tightening the whole body and then
relaxing then slowly coming up to the
standing position and centering in TAS
then doing theas from the right side and
coming back slowly then doing it on the
left side theas coming back then sitting
down again shasan 3 minutes saas called
quick relaxation technique then sitting
posture
Vasan front bending
Shashank back pending arasan again going
back to shasan 30
minutes that works wonders if you sleep
for 6 hours you will get 9% rest within
30 minutes can get 32%
rest is the yoga of centuries ago the
same as the yoga of today in the story
that follows Guru Nida Joi does a
relevance check
relevance of yoga in today's time will
be the same what it was 5,000 years
ago because yoga is timeless it is a
spiritual subject adhyatmik V which has
no boundaries which has no time so
relevance will remain the same
perception may change
it was uh beneficial those days now and
in the next millennium
also to have a good health you have to
be always connected with the
nature that means that you should sleep
on proper time eat as much as you can
healthy food and always connected and
respectful towards the
nature if you are connected with the
nature you cannot disconnect with
yourself and if you are connected to
yourself so beautifully then the health
issues go away from
you chair badwan is one of the most
beautiful improvisation of Mr anger the
original pose is bhad but he has
developed this on the chair so that
anyone everyone can do it
and chair is a prop which is available
everywhere if not chair then you have a
stool when you do badw asan it's a
twisting posture it allows your organic
body to evacuate the oxygenated blood
and when you come back to the normal
position it brings the oxygenated blood
to the organic body so it's one of the
finest posture to give if I can say say
so the exercise are a very organic
massage to the internal
organs it works on your spine like a
miracle it has been proven now that the
dis which are gone out of the position
if this pose done correctly that means
the excess is correct then the dis come
back to its original position
so it's very very beneficial for the
people who are working throughout the
day they are tired they're working on
computers or they feel very slugish
because there is a sedentary job
throughout the day so it's a very
beautiful
pose Ur danasan is one of my favorite
poses because uh you know to say which
one is the best one is very difficult
because all are very beautiful and have
different effects
but Ur Ras is my favorite because when I
started my journey this was one of the
most difficult ASAS to perform and when
I started doing it it was again working
like a miracle on my spine and my inner
being it gives you a huge amount of
confidence and the spinal
stiffness goes away it gives you the
agility and a lot of strength to your
spine
with that is now time to head to a short
break but there's a lot of soul
stretching to do on the other side so do
come right back coming up after the
break a conversation with s welcome back
you're watching the special
International yoga Day episode of The
Men's Health and Women's Health show and
I'm your host Jamal shik up next is a
conversation with sadguru jagi vasudev
who gives us a trick or two to improve
concentration let's listen up
human mechanism has not evolved in any
big way in the last few thousand
years so yoga is about this human
mechanism so there is no such thing as
ancient yoga modern yoga yes today's
yoga today's yoga tomorrow yoga because
yoga is about the inner mechanism of who
we
are it's a travesty that the yoga that
Urban centers in India is experiencing
is largely a rebound from the American
Coast so we
think that yoga means ASA no ASA is only
a small part of yoga yoga means Union
Union means your ability to experience
yourself beyond the limitations of your
physical
boundaries the core of yoga would demand
a certain level of discipline and focus
if you do not have that you want to do
something very simple there are simple
processes called UPA yoga or pre yoga or
sub yoga UPA yoga is only about your
physiological and psychological
situations are improving these
situations everybody can make use of few
forms of UPA yoga even in your workplace
even when you're driving you could do a
little bit of UPA yoga that means it
does not demand any particular situation
both internally and externally everybody
can make use of AA yoga
life is a product of polarities
masculine and feminine yin and yang
Shiva shaki whatever we want to call
it just bringing these two hands
together and holding it this
way and looking upon something or
someone with loving attention it could
be anything a tree a rock a cloud your
father mother husband wife child pay
absolute attention to something or
someone a loving attention with your
hands together you will see you will
begin to harmonize within yourself once
you settle the polarities within you you
can step out into the world and act with
much more
balance health will not happen to us
unless we turn inward because the entire
body that we have today is manufactured
from within we may be putting raw
material from outside but it is
manufactured from within so if you have
some repair job to be done would you
like to go to the manufacturer or the
local Tinker this simply depends upon
are you still keeping in touch with that
which is a source of creation within you
or have you lost it yoga means finding
this connect
within yoga is not about becoming
superhuman
it's about realizing that being human is
super as there is a science and
technology for external well-being there
is a science and technology for inner
well-being this is what is referred to
as yoga if one wants to practice yoga it
is important that a certain amount of
focus a committed atmosphere and the
right kind of guidance to begin with is
most important frivolous ways of
learning could bring you to problematic
situations so this is why I'm saying if
you're not ready for yoga yet start with
Opa yoga which does not demand the same
level of discipline and
focus one of the cooler new forms of
yoga is aial Yoga which feels as good as
it looks Master the art and hanging out
will never be the same again hi I'm here
to try a new form of work out it's a
Twist on traditional yoga and from what
I've heard chances of levitating are
quite high so let's take a
look hi I'm Ken s I'm the founder of
Fitness
solution I trust with yoga and other
forms of Fitness started about 20 years
back
aial yoga is recent it's been introduced
about a year back the cloth hanging
behind me it's a piece of a silk hanging
from a carabina which is used by the
Mountaineers and here you basically do
the climbing part pulling yourself
upward unlike doing some mat work it's
fun it's challenging it's exhilarating
experience to be able to climb up to fly
to be able to to
balance cuz for women we do not do upper
body training like pull-ups or push-ups
and this focuses more on the upper body
and core training so now let's start
with the warm-up
exercises the first one we are doing is
squats with the pull-ups in squats what
you're utilizing is your thighs
quadricep muscles as well as for your
pull-ups upper body
muscles the second one is spinal
rotations that's for your back so that
your spine and the back is warmed up and
these exercises help you to go further
now I'm going to up the difficulty level
and now what we are going to do is tie a
knot take this Fabric in both your hands
roll it around your arms the hands first
go upward and then from down below grab
the fabric pull the fabric from
inside and tie this knot firmly make
sure it's strong and firm because you're
going to stand on top of
this three POS keep your left leg on top
of the right you can take the arms up
you're standing in a tree POS on the
aial silk this is the first way the way
you balance
yourself from starting position you can
sit down on the knot and now you can go
into a straddle position which is a
inverted
position you can hold yourself there
it's good for the lower back stretch
it's like a h Lassen inverted stay in
the styled position and after that roll
yourself up
carefully and you can just come up
with that we come to the end of a very
special episode for more regular updates
follow me on Twitter and Instagram at
Jamal shake and on Facebook at Jamal s
shake and until next week keep that body
stretched and the mind Nimble for we
won't be happy with your fit not until
you're at your fittest